In Praise of the Hearth Deity I bow to the Three Roots. When one wants to praise the deity of the hearth, one should sweep and clean the whole hearth and its surroundings well. Rub oil on the hearth and mix the three white foods. Prepare the various food substances for the smoke offerings on the hearth's stone surface. Either an elaborate smoke-offering ritual or the one associated with In Praise of the Domestic Deity are fine. In any case, regarding the act of cleansing, one says: Just as the god Brahmā cleansed The Sugata after he was born, With water that is unpolluted wisdom nectar, I now cleanse the deity of the hearth. May the deterioration and pollution Caused by impurities in the fire, the hearth's contamination, and uncleanliness, With which all the deities of the hearth and of sustenance have been affected, be purified. May you become delighted in unsullied bliss! OṂ ŚUDDHE ŚUDDHE ŚĀDHANA YE SARVA ŚĪNTAṂ KURU SVĀHĀ Then recite any sort of cleansing mantra and sprinkle the water for bathing. Moisten the hearth's smoke offerings with water. Hey! Where did The Praise of the Hearth Deity originate? In an earlier time, during the first era King Suvarṇarathī invited A powerful and competent vidyādhara Named Śāntigarbha, Who summoned the hearth deity by means of mantras and mudrās And placated him with offerings and supplications. Because he was made to abide by a pledge, There was perfect happiness in that home. The hearth and the preparation of food and drink did not cease. An ocean of food, wealth, and sensory objects was amassed. Just as in earlier times when this originated, In today's auspicious and virtuous era We, the vidyādharas, call the deity of the hearth Pleasantly, not sternly. We beckon to the hearth deity and attend to him without taming him. We make offerings to the hearth deity, materially and not just a little. We praise the hearth deity, highly and not just a little. With the various kinds of nectar-containing wood, We light a fire, blazing with merit. We add the great substances of pure and excellent nutriments, Such as the three whites, the three sweets, fruit, Roasted flour, boiled milk, various grains, and so on. We sprinkle pure mineral water and snow water. With OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ, we have purified, increased, and transformed it; With HA HO HRĪ, we have blessed it. Therefore, this smoke offering made from the sensory enjoyments Of strong colors, fragrances, and flavors Is what is offered to the guru, the tutelary deity, and the Three Jewels. It is presented to the ḍākinīs, Dharma protectors, and guardian deities. Please bless this hearth And make an ocean of siddhis fall like rain! Crush the hungry and ghostly vampire demons into smithereens! Please cause the glorious essences of fortune and luck to gather! Hey! O great deity Gaṇapati Who reigns over the hearth- You are red in color and you radiate light. Your hand is held in the mudrā of beckoning. You are decked out with silks and jewels, Accompanied by hundreds of thousands of divine genyen. Please come here and partake of this smoke offering! We respectfully praise and delight you. Please safeguard this hearth, Which belongs to us and the sponsor of the materials! Never let its fire and smoke cease! Amass an ocean of food and cooking! Bring forth flavorsome sustenance and ambrosia! Crush the hungry and ghostly vampire demons into smithereens! Grant us all desirable enjoyments and spiritual accomplishments! Please bring about fortune and well-being! Hey! O yakṣa hearth deity called Yumo, Reigning over the hearth, You are female and wear turquoise ornaments. Dressed in garments of various kinds of silk, You hold a golden ladle in your hand. Accompanied by a hundred thousand yakṣa maidens, Please come here and partake of this smoke offering! Then proceed with "We respectfully praise," and so forth. Hey! O nāga king Migön Karpo, Who reigns over the hearth, Your body's hue is like a mass of crystal. In your hand you hold a thought-increasing jewel. Your snake-headed serpent hood is majestic and splendid. You wear a lapis lazuli head ornament. You have a retinue of a hundred thousand nāga heroes. Then proceed with "Please come here, partake of this smoke offering," and so forth. Hey! You other deities, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and the like Who are connected to the hearth, All those assemblies that protect for the sake of the good, Develop an intention toward peace and benefit! Then proceed with "Please come here," and so forth. Hey! O Sipa, the owner of the fire, You burn gloriously in light and splendor. You hold quick-acting, blessed juniper. You are the one who partakes in the libation of all the maṇḍalas. Powerful king of fire deities, Your body's hue is like a mass of flames. Drangtrengchen, you carry a round water vessel; You have the accoutrements of a ṛṣi and are full of joy. Come here to this fortuitous place today And remain within the blazing fire pit! Please have the sensory enjoyments and nectar burned and poured! We make offerings and praises, and bow to you. Please be the guardian of the blazing fire And bless us with the fire of wisdom! We offer an ocean of precious things Through the best of the enjoyments of food, drink, and cooking. May it fulfill the wishes of the good protectors! May the illnesses, obstructions, and frailty Of the sponsors and owners be appeased with excellent flavor and nutrition! And may our lifespan, merit, and vigor increase ever more! Please bring about fortune and well-being! Hey! Since we have extolled the fortuitous deities of the hearth In such a way, through offerings and praise, Please consider this hearth with delight And continuously bestow your blessings and siddhis! Bring forth a powerful mass of leaders and friends! May sensory enjoyments and material goods gather like clouds! Produce the ambrosia of strong flavor and nutrition! Please extract from that long lives, good health, and strength, And abandon envy, malice, and jealousy! May you fulfill wishes and achieve aspirations! Please avert the obstacles in life! Offerings! Offerings! Offerings to the deities! Victory! Victory! May the gods be victorious! Virtue! Virtue! Fortune and virtue! May there be an abundance of auspiciousness and happiness! Having said this, scatter the best bits of the food and the different kinds of grains into the hearth. Then recite elaborate verses of fortune. The sponsors of the offerings are then consecrated by the food and drink consisting of the three white substances and so on. One should then create auspicious circumstances by singing lucky and happy songs, and the like. Maṅgalam. 
